---
author: Stella
date: 2022-12-08 17:42:09 +0000
layout: post
permalink: 17
title: planning to try
---


Getting comfortable with failure - and the particular way I have been
socialised to do it - has itself been the greater failure of my own life.  

Do you remember that night we were out in the forest, four of us, and the rain
was bucketing down and we'd retreated to the warmest corner of our wooden hut.
Maybe we were drinking hot chocolate, and somebody asked what everyone's
greatest fear was? And you and I, right off the bat, we said 'failure'. And
the other two, just a second behind, said it was losing someone they loved.  

A slight segue: to consider Taskmaster, one in the never ending series of
lightweight comedy shows that people working the scene rotate through in
Britain, like 8 of 10 Cats, Would I Lie to You, etc etc. Contestants
(professional comedians, mostly) do tasks for points, including for bringing
in their own prizes. Taskmaster has a range of recurring characters, one of
which is Fred the Swede. In one series, contestants were asked [to find out
information from him](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GoTVEXiWypo "to find out
information from him") \- which included his greatest fear. _Att misslyckas_ ,
he says.  

Now look, I'm not on a TV show. But I still can't help but point out that Fred
the Swede is most famous (in the english-speaking world at least) for being,
well, Fred the Swede, an infrequently recurring character on a ridiculous,
existentially oblivious comedy show. And he's most afraid, of all things,
death and loss and taxes and being trapped alone in a room full of rats
available to him as choices, of failure. I mean, what does that even mean?
What project, what work are we so afraid of failing on?  

Then I look, once I have that feeling of absurdity, at what the practical
effects of that fear have been in my own life, and I reach a squiggly kind of
shame feeling. Fear of failing has not made me more likely to try for things.
Fear of failure has made me less likely to define what it is that I want to
do, and then even when I know, it's made me more likely to turn from it in
resignation. Well, I can't have _that_ anyway. Better embrace [feeling
terrible about yourself](https://thelastpsychiatrist.com/2012/06/amy_schumer_offers_you_a_look.html) instead.

Elsewhere on that same blog, TLP describes the same in [more
detail](https://thelastpsychiatrist.com/2012/01/couple_reveals_childs_gender_f.html
"more detail"), ' _the desire to be something coupled with the terror of doing
anything-- which results in ambivalence and inertia camouflaged in a
consumerist lifestyle full of meaningless choices_ '  

Didn't I assume that just now, talking about Fred the Swede? That success for
him must be to 'be' someone (who is famous), not to have done something - I
walked right into it.  

So critically important, now, to create some positive vision, which we really
could fail to reach. Are we working to keep away '[ _weariness, vice, and
want_](https://angst.blog/16 "weariness, vice and want")' in the world? Your
kelpie might be scratching at the doors of your mind, but mine is weary from
want of work.
