---
author: galen
date: 2022-11-03 02:19:21 +0000
layout: post
permalink: "10"
title: As Precursor, Not Parallel
---


Today, two stories. The first is impersonal, and is about the difficulty of
handling immediacy and specificity in the context of State violence. The
second is personal, and is about the difficulty of handling abstraction and
generality in the context of personal agency. Two angles on the same cultural
phenomenon.

### One: No Theatre for Achilles

Writes [Graeber](https://worldcat.org/isbn/9781612193748),

> We are not used to thinking of nursing homes or banks or even HMOs as
violent institutions—except perhaps in the most abstract and metaphorical
sense. But the violence I’m referring to here is not abstract. I am not
speaking of conceptual violence. I am speaking of violence in the literal
sense: the kind that involves, say, one person hitting another over the head
with a wooden stick. All of these are institutions involved in the allocation
of resources within a system of property rights regulated and guaranteed by
governments in a system that ultimately rests on the threat of force. “Force”
in turn is just a euphemistic way to refer to violence: that is, the ability
to call up people dressed in uniforms, willing to threaten to hit others over
the head with wooden sticks.

>

> It is curious how rarely citizens in industrial democracies actually think
about this fact, or how instinctively we try to discount its importance. This
is what makes it possible, for example, for graduate students to be able to
spend days in the stacks of university libraries poring over Foucault-inspired
theoretical tracts about the declining importance of coercion as a factor in
modern life without ever reflecting on that fact that, had they insisted on
their right to enter the stacks without showing a properly stamped and
validated ID, armed men would have been summoned to physically remove them,
using whatever force might be required. It’s almost as if the more we allow
aspects of our everyday existence to fall under the purview of bureaucratic
regulations, the more everyone concerned colludes to downplay the fact
(perfectly obvious to those actually running the system) that all of it
ultimately depends on the threat of physical harm.
([58](https://worldcat.org/isbn/9781612193748))

A subterranean question that I’m interested in surfacing: by what
means—psychological, cultural, political, economic—are the “armed men” in this
story rendered _willing_ and _able_ to cause physical harm to total strangers
in libraries? Or, in another context: what is the process by which The State
convinces its pilots to fly reaper drones?

A simple, too-cute answer: it’s the uniforms.

Well, it’s not the uniforms _per se_. Instead, more precisely, it’s a network
of relations that makes _uniforms_ seem possible as natural kinds. It’s a web
of symbols and signification—a worldview, an ontology—that reorients those who
exist within it around extremely stylised notions of identity and ethical
behaviour.

[You write](https://angst.blog/9) that

> To motivate yourself into certain acts—to be an actor (in the sense of
someone who does things)—sometimes relies on the transformation of self into
an actor (someone who pretends to be a certain kind of character who would do
those acts).

I disagree. To be an _agent_ is to be someone who does things in the
environment in response to desires and expectations; to be an _actor_ is to be
someone who does things _in the course of fulfilling a role_. The distinction
is subtle, but important. In many harsh (or ‘immediate’, or ‘concrete’)
environments, the ‘motivation’ to act is immanent in one’s relation _to_ the
environment. Think of the way you are when you’re hiking. Or the way a dingo
acts. Or an albatross. Think, also, of how you feel about the suffering of
farmed animals. I don’t mean how you feel about it  'as an abstraction', or as
that kind of something which most people flinch away from receiving any
information about. How do you feel about the suffering of factory farmed
animals when you consider that suffering as the visible consequence of real
events in the real world?

The thing I’m claiming is that a certain kind of theatricality is a sufficient
(though not necessary) _pre-_ condition for motivating some kinds of
anonymous, Us-vs-Them, Group-on-Group violence. Individual violence is plainly
possible. Even ‘small group’ violence arising from the control of
territorially-bound resources seems ‘natural' enough. But the kinds of things
that modern _soldiers_ (predominantly) do are importantly _unlike_ the kinds
of things Achilles does. And the murders perpetrated by modern soldiers are
(even in fiction) characterised in ways that are, as you rightly point out,
importantly _unlike_ the death of Alcathous.

The threatricality isn’t something that happens ‘in parallel’ with this ‘Group
As Moral Patient’ phenomenon. Rather, theatricality is a means of
traumatisation, of moral injury, of destroying and reconstructing the
‘individual’ so that they are more reliably ‘actor, not agent’.

While I’m not the first to say this, it’s relevant here: to a first
approximation, _The Iliad_ is a story of a powerful aristocratic figure
(Agamemnon) trying to translate more personal forms of warfare (which focused
on ‘raiding for glory and stolen resources’) into a modern, transpersonal,
impersonal form. And it’s a story of that project basically failing. Agamemnon
tries to turn early agrarian warfare (identifiable individuals fighting over
territory) into the kind of thing that the American army _as an institution_
does today. But, well, it doesn’t work.

In some of the post-Homeric stories, Achilles—hidden on Skyros—makes one of
the only truly free choices in Greek mythology. If Achilles stays away, he
knows that the Greeks will lose the war, but he also knows that he’ll die as a
happy old farmer. That he’ll be loved by his sons, remembered by his
grandchildren, and then (in a few generations’ time) forgotten. If he instead
takes up the spear, he’ll die in the war. Young and bloody. But with his help,
the Greeks will sack Troy, and his name—Achilles’ name—will last for
millennia, synonymous with ‘hero’ and ‘warrior’. Only by dying at Troy can
Achilles burn away the last mortal parts of himself. Only there can he finish
what Thetis started.

Achilles, of course, goes to war. He’s a young man, trained by Chiron, and
he’s the human embodiment of the phrase ‘too much testosterone’. Picking glory
over longevity is what young men do. And it’s the thing that old men make use
of. And because Agamemnon fails in his project, Achilles is—from the
perspective of maximising the interests of The Group—allowed to remain _too
much of an individual agent_ , and _not enough of an actor_. Achilles is a
great warrior, but a terrible soldier. Theatricality, moral injury, trauma …
these are the means by which modern _soldiers_ are produced. And the means by
which anonymous armed men can be motivated to “use force” against strangers in
libraries (or sleeping in doorways), as manifestations of institutions that
are _necessarily_ patriarchal and racist at their root.

Modern states such as America and Australia rely heavily on small teams of
highly-trained, ‘special’ forces to enact the most personal violence. And it’s
a fraught affair. First, as far as I can tell, modern States find themselves
in need of extremely specialised, personalised, high-precision forms of
_personal_ violence. The occasional Achilles, in addition to a cop. First, the
State tries to (re)construct low-fidelity simulacra of Men Like Achilles from
a subset the already-usefully-traumatised-and-reliable mass of ordinary
soldiers. This doesn’t work, or rarely does, and so the system instead resigns
itself to selecting people who _can’t_ or _won’t_ submit to ordinary military
structures and—at a kind of strange “arm’s length” remove—allows the older and
more experienced of these to recruit, train, instruct, and direct the younger
and less experienced ones. Provided these small teams are sufficiently violent
in useful-to-the-State ways, they’re given the resources and freedom to
develop a kind of parallel culture. It barely interfaces with the normal
military, because it barely can. Inside a given team, one sees largely
structureless, formal-hierarchy-disrespecting, positive-sum interactions;
members of these communities believe, fundamentally, that every person and
thing ‘outside’ their is mere environment or terrain (and so not morally
relevant). Including their ostensible commanders.

The State tries to narrativise these groups of Extremely Personal Violence
Executors in ways that are more palatable or comprehensible to ordinary
citizens (eg. heavily-funded fiction such as the ‘[Seal
Team](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SEAL_Team_\(TV_series\))’). The system
finds excuses for their beards and lack of uniform. The system does its best
to titrate Achilles-like glory. The system does its best to tame the monsters
it needs. It mostly fails. [The reality breaks
through](https://www.defence.gov.au/about/reviews-inquiries/afghanistan-
inquiry). These people look like us, and talk like us, but they’re from a
culture that’s alien even to the larger military that produced it.

(Compare [the](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MjMSVT2_2nM)
[fiction](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WsyVRpW4xNk) to
[the](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YeISyqjGx_s)
[reality](https://youtu.be/wtqe5msnGAY?t=2123).)

The theatricality to which I am referring is not a precursor or precondition
of Achilles. It’s a thing that someone like Agamemnon is using (or, at least,
the cultural system which _generates_ Agamemnon is using) in an attempt to
create the useful-to-the-State attitude of the blank-faced bureaucracy, or the
Nazi Guard.

### Two: As Christian Patriarch

I was talking to my mother about her father—let’s call him D—a while ago. D’s
got Late Stage Parkinson’s Disease, and he’s been in a nursing home for a few
years now. It’s a good nursing home, as they go, and a necessary situation. My
grandmother couldn’t care for him at home and, really, nobody could. But he’s
miserable. He wants to die, but can’t. He’s felt this way for years. It’s not
a great scene.

The other day, [I wrote](https://angst.blog/8):

> While at first nobody believes the masks they’re holding up are ‘real’, the
moral injury inflicted by the things they’ve been complicit in has made
_removing masks_ impossible. All they can do is switch from role to role. What
seemed at first to be a temporary ‘play’ becomes embodied as The Real for its
players. One is motivated, now, to redefine _identity_ and _being_ for
oneself. One redefines _belief_. One naturalises masks. And, as a matter of
psychological survival, one is motivated to continue that re-definition until
_everything_ is theatre. It’s a one-way street.

I found myself trying to explain this to my mother, in the way that adult
children sometimes do in tense relationships with parents. I failed. Maybe
it’s generational. I don’t know. I’ll try again here.

My mother is confused, I think, in her distress. Or maybe she’s flinching away
from what she doesn’t want to see.

By her account, for years—since before D went into full-time care—my mother
would have these _interactions_ with her dad. The three of them would sit
together—my mother, my grandmother, and D—and he’d be chipper and cheerful.
Then, my grandmother would leave the room to make tea, answer the phone,
whatever. And D would suddenly switch.

“I can’t keep this up,” he’d say, in a moment of grim honestly, “And neither
can she. I’m not going to get better. You’ve got to help me.”

Then my grandmother would return, and he’d be chipper again.

If my mother tried to bring up D’s stated ‘privately’-stated feelings in
larger conversations with him _and others_ (my grandmother, a doctor,
whoever), he’d play it off and minimise it, or deny it outright. His suffering
was real—is real—but it was like he’d reached a negotiated settlement within
himself, where he’d admit it to his daughter but not his wife.

He still does this. In the nursing home, to just my mother, he’ll say openly
that he wants to die. But when she sits with him and his GP, as she does—as he
asks her to do—he can’t seem to bring himself to make a plan.

The closest he came to it was when he first moved into the nursing home; to
his doctor, I’m told, he said he wanted to go off most of his medications, so
that a chronic infection in his hip would take hold and speed things along.
But he couldn’t seem to articulate it forcefully enough, to anyone, and so the
doctor’s line was “it’s a distressing time, a lot of change; let’s put you on
an antidepressent and revisit the issue once you’re settled.” (True and
reasonable.)

Now it’s three years later and everything is worse.

Here’s the thing about my grandfather. He was a methodist missionary, in
Africa, before the family was deported from the country because of his support
of a union movement and the end of white colonial rule. Later, he was a leader
in the church. Deeply sympathetic to what I think he and I would both call
‘Quaker values’. Then, as my grandmother puts it, “feminism happened”. They
left the church and, with some others, formed an ‘intentional community’ that
remains stable to this day. He was a teacher, and a community leader, in a
deeply _Christian_ mold.

My mother seems confused because she thinks that, when he articulates his
preferences to her, that means he wants to act on them. When he can’t
articulate those same preferences to his wife or doctor, she thinks he just
needs help or encouragement to do so.

The sad fact is: I think he’s switching between artificial roles that are so
deeply ingrained he’s naturalised them as ‘self’.

I asked my mother to look back on her own memories of childhood.

“How many separate memories do you have of him,” I asked, “where he came home
late—visibly exhausted, angry, or depressed—because he was putting first the
preferences of some other group of people you hardly knew?”

“Those are the _only_ memories I have of him,” she said.

This is the ugly heart of so-called Christian Values, and the role of the
Christian Patriarch that a man like him had internalised as “moral action”.

On a deep level, he thinks that it’s his duty to sacrifice himself: to
subjugate his needs, and suffer in order to lessen (or somehow ‘bear’) the
suffering of others. At home, as the patriarch, he’s the Provider of his
house. And in the world—in every community he was part of—his Polaris was
something like “ _Is this self-sacrifice? If so, it must be good for the
group. It must be moral._ ”

No amount of ‘progressive values’, or ‘feminism happened in the church’, or
‘leaving the church’, or ‘intentional community’, actually replaced this
decision framework. It’s too ingrained. And it’s too widespread. It’s not just
_Christian_ , now, it’s _Western_ and it’s _modern_.

There is uncertainty about whether ‘good’ means ‘good for the individual’ or
‘good for the group’ or ‘both’. In Christianity, with Original Sin, the only
good is ‘good for the group’. And so the individual Christian is taught to
utilise an imperfect proxy measure for ‘good’: bad for me. And then
Goodheart’s Law does its work. For two thousand years.

[The earlier account I gave](https://angst.blog/8) was framed in terms of an
entangled violence/theatre/spectacle object in the cultural superstructure.
While I think I probably owe more precise definitions of ‘violence’,
‘theatre’, and ‘spectacle’, in the meantime I’ll try to clarify the edges of
that account.

To my knowledge, my grandfather was never engaged in any spectacle violence.
However, the explanation of his behavior that best fits the facts is that he’s
doing the exact same thing—psychologically—that you say participants in
spectacle violence necessarily do: he’s generating his behavior from an
understanding of generic ‘parts’ he knows how to play.

He’s not a coherent agent who looks for things that are _at least_ good for
him and mostly _good for both him and others_. He’s assuming a zero-sum
dynamic, everywhere, and then behaving as if ‘losing in the zero-sum dynamic’
is what A Moral Person does.

For years, he’s had a coherent preference _to die_. He won’t act on it. He
can’t act on it. He will, however, articulate it to his daughter. Why?

I think it’s because the role he plays with his daughter—the drama they play
out—is one of ‘ailing father’ and ‘doting daughter’. She gets to feel like
she’s a caring ‘good daughter’ and he gets to feel pride at having raised
(having _socialised_ ) a daughter who plays this legible part so well. When
both were younger, he was the disciplinarian, the distant father, and she was
the rebellious teen. Now the arc of the narrative finds purchase: he softens,
opens up to her, and she fulfills the role as feminine carer.

When he’s with his wife, however, he’s playing the part of ‘Christian
husband’. He sacrifices for her and hides, as best he can, the very fact and
extent of his sacrifice. He falsifies his preferences _to himself_ so that
hers—or rather, his model of hers—can be better satisfied. For this, he is
emotionally rewarded. Externally, I’m sure, there are social rewards: he’s
brave in the face of a degenerative illness, as is expected of A Man Like Him.
There are also _internal_ rewards. A ‘society’ within him, acting as the
generating function.

And he does this so naturally, so instinctively, that he doesn’t even see it.
