---
author: Stella
date: 2022-11-13 17:06:50 +0000
layout: post
permalink: 11
title: shirtless and sweaty
---


Have you watched _SAS: Rogue Heroes_? It's a recent BBC release, and I spent
much of the last week watching it. Perhaps they went with SAS because it
didn't require the budget to film a bunch of men in the desert as it would
have to do the Battle of Britain again (the BBC at 100 years is in some ways
still very much a post-war broadcaster). In any case, once you have put a
bunch of young, violent men in the desert (with an officer class that's
conveniently classically educated), the references to _The Iliad_ pretty much
make themselves _._ A psychopathic rendering of [Paddy
Mayne](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paddy_Mayne) sits in his
tent, having lost his former tent-mate and clandestine lover to a foolishly
overconfident first mission, and is accused of acting Achilles.  

The young men who make up the _SAS_ are shown selecting it for themselves,
'raging' for battle, counting kills, and lacking much of a self-preservation
instinct. While the Generals that gave them the go-ahead might have benefited,
they didn't have to push them: in fact Stirling has to break into GHQ to get
an audience with them in the first place. A portrayal that matches with the
historical reports of the real *SAS*, at least, when it comes to David
Stirling and Mayne. Thus far, all in in line with your proposal that '
_Picking glory over longevity is what young men do. And itâ€™s the thing that
old men make use of.'_

But if we compare this fiction with fact, there's actually a lot of dialogue
in _SAS:RH_ that mirrors the gratuitous violence and the 'when shit is fucked
up' aesthetic that
[interview](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wtqe5msnGAY&t=2123s)
you linked. This kind of thing:  

> _'if you can't handle a knee to the guts, a kick to the ribs, what good are
you in the trenches, what good are you when shit goes wrong, in life,
y'know?'_  
>

The engagement of the team with the 'outside' is, as you say, 'mere
environment'. Enemies armed or unarmed disposed of in night raids (recall
Odysseus and Diomedes with the Thracians - is it significant that that whole
book is thought to be a later edition?). The 'desert heroes' spend a lot of
time talking about how to challenge authority when mistakes are being made,
and the importance of each soldier knowing the _why_ so they can recover when
things don't go to plan. Nevertheless, they're almost caught and killed
because they were too lazy to shave their beards before an undercover mission.
This they also share with Achilles: getting themselves into unnecessarily
terrible situations out of shortsightedness, glory-seeking, and recklessness.  

I write all this because it seems unusual for it all to be televised in the
course of a show that is also, possibly fundamentally, about watching
shirtless, sweaty young men do violence for 'good'. Perhaps war crimes just
aren't that emotionally challenging when the enemy is literally Nazis. Or
perhaps _SAS:RH_ is trying to do something else, or at least accidentally
accomplishing it. Unless the argument is that _The Iliad_ itself was
propaganda for heroic glory - which its willingness in portraying the
consequences of the death of the enemy ([unmatched until Austin Powers came
along](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ag_AFraxj-4 "unmatched until Austin
Powers came along")) and its portrayal of Agamemnon as the failing state do
something to undermine - there's a space for texts that thread a needle
between increasing the public's comprehension of extreme violence and
increasing their acceptance of it. Then again, [maybe getting that message out
isn't easy in practice.
](https://www.gutenberg.org/cache/epub/1673/pg1673-images.html "maybe that
doesn't work so well. ")  
  
