---
author: Galen
date: 2022-10-17 03:13:22 +0000
layout: post
permalink: 6
title: By Totalising Power
---


Imagine that you’re walking down a street in a big, Western city. Let’s say
central London. It’s late at night, but the pedestrian traffic is still pretty
thick. It’s a Friday evening, let’s say, and the pubs around you are
disgorging their noisesome and well-lubricated masses. You’re tired. You’re
headed home. You’re in your own head, mostly, moving through the crowd towards
the Tube station, when suddenly you see a cop—a ‘bobbie’?—walking towards you.
Not walking towards _you_ , specificially, but walking down the street in your
direction.

Imagine the ideal version of ‘an interaction with this cop’. Imagine that the
cop catches your eye and stops you. Or imagine something dramatic happens in
the rapidly-shrinking stretch of sidewalk between the cop and you. In the
ideal case, how do you want the cop to behave? How do you want things to go
down?

I claim that, for the most part, you want the cop to be as _predictable_ as
possible. [Conditional on you thinking that cops should exist, that they
provide some social benefit at least some of the time] I claim that the
_ideal_ cop (in most people’s minds) is never capricious, never goes ‘off
script’, never applies the law according to their individual preferences or
whims. Sure, they _respond_ to the unfolding situation. They ask for
information, if they need it; they ‘step in’ to de-escalate some interpersonal
conflict, if that’s what’s needed, too. But the _ideal_ cop that you’re
probably imagining would never do anything that you wouldn’t be able to
_predict_ if you had the relevant information about the external world. The
ideal cop is a machine, in a certain sense. They lack any rich internal
epistemics. They don’t act on their own preferences. Rather, they act on
information _programmatically_ or _procedurally_ , and those procedures are—in
the ideal case—legible to you. They’re great at dealing with situations that
look similar to situations they’ve encountered (and been trained to handle)
before. That’s what it is for a cop to be a ‘good cop’, a ‘reliable’ and
‘trustworthy’ agent in the world.

Now, instead, think of the ideal friend, or the ideal lover. Think about what
makes them good, reliable, trustworthy in your mind. In the case of an
intimate partner or close friend, often I think the _opposite_ is true: the
thing that it is for someone to be ‘reliable’ or ‘trustworthy’ in that context
is, instead, that they’re (in a very particular sense) _unpredictable_ to you.
Often, I think, we want friends/lovers/collaborators who share our values, but
have their own capacities. Rarely, I think, do we want
friends/lovers/collaborators to be predictable in the machine-like sense that
an ideal ‘cop’ or ‘soldier’ is predictable. I can’t imagine anything worse
than a friend who can be ‘trusted’ to ‘act in the same way every time’ but
can’t be ‘trusted’ to ‘process and respond to novel information in novel
ways’. I want a lover who surprises me, a friend who pushes me, a collaborator
to whom I can delegate some of the work of investigating, judging, and
responding to the world (and who delegates to me in turn).

To a first approximation, a cop/soldier is good insofar as they’re cog-like; a
friend/collaborator is good insofar as they’re not.

I think this tension—in everyday notions of trustworthiness and reliability of
agents—is itself a gesture towards what I want to call _two competing
definitions of The Good_.

  1. Something is ‘good’ insofar as it provides benefit to The Group.
  2. Something is ‘good’ insofar as it provides benefit to one or more (identifiable) Individuals.

In a naïve account, these two definitions are coextensive. ‘The Group’ is just
a set of Individuals. If something is good for ‘The Group’, then it’s
(definitionally) good for identifiable Individuals.

The problem: I don’t think it’s quite so simple.

My sense is that, if you’re using (1) as your working definition, then—in many
agrarian and post-agrarian contexts, at least—you start to imagine that ‘Doing
Good’ entails self-sacrifice. That you should ‘bear the burden’, so that
others don’t have to. While this is a Christian mentality, it’s not (in my
view) uniquely Christian so much as it is uniquely ‘the kind of mentality one
might end up having if one exists in a society that runs on fixed
agriculture’. If you’re instead using (2) as your working definition, my sense
is that you tend to start with an assumption of positive-sumness. The most
easily identifiable individual is _yourself_ , so something is ‘good’ insofar
as it’s ‘good for you _and other people_ ’.

When [you wrote](https://angst.blog/5) about your comrade’s “radical
proposal”, you pointed out that the proposal was entangled with “a model of
belief in which we could know and not do (even when it was ostensibly within
our power)”. You pointed out that _within_ such a model of belief, the
‘solution’ to the ‘problem’ was necessarily one to be enacted and “mediated
neither by self-interest or rational thinking or community agreement but by
totalising power”.

I don’t know how to say this without it reading like the first draft of a
manifesto, so you’ll have to forgive me:

You identified, in your comrade, a reflexive mental motion which I think is
both _incredibly_ common and _deeply_ culturally contingent. More than that, I
think that if you and I try to trace this reflex to the cultural nervous
system that generates it, we _might_ also start to see the ways in which
everyday notions of ‘the good’ as ‘good for The Group’ turn out to be deeply
harmful, patriarchal, racist, repugnant, pro-suffering, and anti-life.

There is, I think, a general (modern) tendency to grasp for “totalising power”
as if it is the _natural_ and ‘ _necessary_ ’ force which binds Individuals
together into Systems. My intuition is that this tendency is _downstream_ of a
worldview in which ‘the group comes first’ because, on some level, ‘The Group’
is the moral patient. My intuition is that a certain kind of _transpersonal
violence_ is deployed, to _traumatic_ and manipulative effect, to transform
humans from ‘agents who think positive-sumness is everywhere’ into ‘agents who
play archetypal roles in service of the Collective’. I think one can read this
pattern of culture—in its birth, its presence, its abscence, its effect—in
places as varied as _The Iliad_ , _The Massacre at Paris_ , the Australian
Western Desert, the archetype of the ‘Christian Patriarch’, and the
Heraclitean deathroll of a crocodile.

If you’re interested, I can try to point towards this pattern in the coming
letters, and we can try to untangle my many uncertainties about it.

In the meantime, a question: do you ever feel like _you_ are traffic, or do
you only ever feel stuck ‘in’ traffic?
  
