---
author: Galen
date: 2022-12-03 11:50:05 +0000
layout: post
permalink: "16"
title: Cultivation of One's Garden
---


I am terrible—truly _terrible_ —at caring for the herbs and vegetables in my
balcony garden. It’s a simple enough task, I know: there’s [no nuclear winter
right now](https://allfed.info/resilient-foods/catastrophic-risks-to-food),
and it’s summer here around _-35.2,149.1_ ; really, all I have to do is add a
little water _daily_ to a dozen pots and beds. And yet, somehow, I always seem
to forget. Even as I write this, a part of me is thinking “Oh, it’s fine
_this_ time, I’ll do it in a moment! Look, I’m even writing about it!” But no.
Don’t be fooled. Smart money—60/40—says I won’t. Instead, I’ll fall into some
other, more absorbing task. A day will pass. Another. And so my lettuce wilts.

Last week, I started on a tattoo project, covering my arms (and chest, and
upper back) with blackwork flowers. A ballet shrug of ink. While I’ve known
_of_ the artist for a while—an Adelaide expat, via Amsterdam and Stuttgart—six
hours of [clustered needle and capillary
action](https://youtu.be/kxLoycj4pJY?t=76) on a Tuesday afternoon was the
first time we’d really spent together. As it turns out, we’re both somewhat
quiet, and they’re somewhat _intense. I_ t wasn’t until the second half of the
session (my inner right bicep, a famously ‘spicy’ spot) that we really started
talking. One thing that we turned out to share was this: we were both willing
to admit, about ourselves, that we go a little mad without A Project. [My mind
may be a Parliament](https://angst.blog/3), but if you force me to take a six
day holiday of ‘resting’, I can promise you: by day four, at the very latest,
every chair in my Westminster will be ripped apart by one sad kelpie in need
of a run. I am endlessly confused by people who can lie down, in the sun, on a
beach, without a project or a growing sense of misery. My tattoo artist, as it
turns out, feels the same.

The garden. The tattoo. The kelpie in my skull. The prospect of being—perhaps,
in a certain sense—a “[naïve animal](https://angst.blog/15)”. All these are
connected, in my mind, to that oft-misunderstood and oft-misquoted final
passage of _[Candide](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Candide)_ :

> “You must have a vast and magnificent estate,” said Candide to the Turk.

>

> “I have only twenty acres,” replied the old man; “I and my children
cultivate them; our labour preserves us from three great evils—weariness,
vice, and want.”

>

> Candide, on his way home, made profound reflections on the old man’s
conversation.

>

> “This honest Turk,” said he to Pangloss and Martin, “seems to be in a
situation far preferable to that of the six kings with whom we had the honour
of supping.”

>

> “Grandeur,” said Pangloss, “is extremely dangerous according to the
testimony of philosophers. For, in short, Eglon, King of Moab, was
assassinated by Ehud; Absalom was hung by his hair, and pierced with three
darts; King Nadab, the son of Jeroboam, was killed by Baasa; King Ela by
Zimri; Ahaziah by Jehu; Athaliah by Jehoiada; the Kings Jehoiakim, Jeconiah,
and Zedekiah, were led into captivity. You know how perished Crœsus, Astyages,
Darius, Dionysius of Syracuse, Pyrrhus, Perseus, Hannibal, Jugurtha,
Ariovistus, Cæsar, Pompey, Nero, Otho, Vitellius, Domitian, Richard II. of
England, Edward II., Henry VI., Richard III., Mary Stuart, Charles I., the
three Henrys of France, the Emperor Henry IV.! You know——”

>

> “I know also,” said Candide, “that we must cultivate our garden.”

>

> “You are right,” said Pangloss, “for when man was first placed in the Garden
of Eden, he was put there _ut operaretur eum_ , that he might cultivate it;
which shows that man was not born to be idle.”

>

> “Let us work,” said Martin, “without disputing; it is the only way to render
life tolerable.”

>

> The whole little society entered into this laudable design, according to
their different abilities. Their little plot of land produced plentiful crops.
Cunegonde was, indeed, very ugly, but she became an excellent pastry cook;
Paquette worked at embroidery; the old woman looked after the linen. They were
all, not excepting Friar Giroflée, of some service or other; for he made a
good joiner, and became a very honest man.

>

> Pangloss sometimes said to Candide:

>

> “There is a concatenation of events in this best of all possible worlds: for
if you had not been kicked out of a magnificent castle for love of Miss
Cunegonde: if you had not been put into the Inquisition: if you had not walked
over America: if you had not stabbed the Baron: if you had not lost all your
sheep from the fine country of El Dorado: you would not be here eating
preserved citrons and pistachio-nuts.”

>

> “All that is very well,” answered Candide, “but let us cultivate our
garden.”

This is **not** , I think, _arbeit macht frei_ , nor is it a passive retreat
from The World At Large into a state of Epicurian _ataraxia + aponia_ , nor is
it the imagined seclusion-to-write of Voltaire’s
[mates](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Encyclop%C3%A9distes). Nor is it
[pessimism](http://worldcat.org/isbn/9781912248193). Instead, I think it's
something more akin to a kind of pragmatic refusal to engage with both

  1. any of the widespread propaganda of a [conflict theory](https://slatestarcodex.com/2018/01/24/conflict-vs-mistake/), and
  2. any ‘resignation’ from an (imagined-to-be preëxisting/primordial) state of conflict.

A pragmatic refusal which extends, I think, in the case of Candide’s garden-
cultivation, _even to the level of metaphysics_. It is an unwillingness to
entertain, not just stubborn Panglossian theodicy, but theodicy _itself_.

And it’s a compromise made by one’s Parliament. It’s something like:

>  _Shit, well, we’ve got this kelpie. He’s not going anywhere. We may as well
put him to work on something that’s positive-sum. He seems to want the work._

It’s silly, perhaps, but every time I read _[The
Martian](http://worldcat.org/isbn/9780804139021)_ I end up crying. I’ve always
struggled to explain the tears. It’s not because ‘Earth’ ‘comes together’ to
waste resources and ‘bring our boy home safe’. That shit does basically
nothing for me. The bits that make me cry are the countless scenes in which an
earnest nerd works hard to solve a difficult problem for which they know the
sole reward will be _yet another problem_ of a different sort. That’s the
‘shared humanity’ that makes sense to me: a lack of habituation.
