---
author: galen
date: 2023-03-10 10:12:16 +0000
layout: post
permalink: "32"
title: Crude Little Wooden Idols
---


I buried [my grandfather](https://angst.blog/10) a few hours ago. [Cracks will
spiderweb across the surface of the altar while I’m
asleep](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jcip_uN9dOI), I’m sure. [There’s gonna
be a party when the wolf comes
home](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ztAjEgVEveI). For now, though, this is
context (not eulogy). [I’m totally in the full heat of this one, so I haven’t
bothered to tune](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=x-rcVjV2Jk0). I’ll leave the
eulogising for another time, when a self-that-is-reflective is less clearly
absent from the [Parliament](https://angst.blog/3). [_In quella parte dove sta
memoria,_](https://ezrapoundcantos.org/canto-lxiii/lxiii-poem) I have, today,
only fragments and borrowed text.

[You write of the millenarian](https://angst.blog/31) — of the void and the
vertigo; the crying out _the end is nigh_ — and I’m afraid that any discussion
of a fire-and-brimstone sense of being “[cosmically
significant](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/features/2023-03-07/effective-
altruism-s-problems-go-beyond-sam-bankman-fried#xj4y7vzkg)” is beyond me.
While it is, perhaps, today, of all days, _especially_ beyond me, it is in
general _not a feeling I feel_. I tend not to feel any sense of [extraordinary
power](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/pQGFeKvjydztpgnsY/occupational-
infohazards) w/r/t AI problems, nor any _overwhelming_ sense that “[we’re all
gonna die](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/FKNtgZrGYwgsz3nHT/bankless-
podcast-159-we-re-all-gonna-die-with-eliezer)”. I don’t feel as if I’m
[staring down the barrel of an accelerationist gun](https://www.vox.com/the-
highlight/2019/11/11/20882005/accelerationism-white-supremacy-christchurch). I
don’t [fear the black ball in the
urn](https://doi.org/10.1111/1758-5899.12718) _in my viscera_ and I never (as
a result) find myself mustering or suppressing a [go-down-
fighting](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/j9Q8bRmwCgXRYAgcJ/miri-announces-
new-death-with-dignity-strategy) [grim](https://mindingourway.com/detach-the-
grim-o-meter/) resolve. I also feel no sense of [setting keel to
breakers](https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems/54314/canto-i). No sense of
[a numb nightmare, or a light in Troy](https://allpoetry.com/The-Gyres),
either.

What I _do_ feel, quite often, is a profound _confusion_ at the (expressed  &
enacted) endorsement of a ‘do bad to do good’ moral attitude. There’s a tonne
of people who seem to think that there’s an existentially-catastrophic
shoggoth visible on the horizon. They broadly seem to agree that “[demon
summoning is easy, and angel summoning is much
harder](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/Aq82XqYhgqdPdPrBA/full-transcript-
eliezer-yudkowsky-on-the-bankless-podcast)”. And then they seem to think — _as
if it’s obvious and natural to think this_ — “well, you know, shit, I guess
we’ve gotta do as much practical summoning research as possible”. [They keep
putting their foot down, hard, on the pedal](https://openai.com/blog/planning-
for-agi-and-beyond).

 _They just don’t seem okay_.

Nobody seems okay.

They seem somehow _dissociated_. Alienated from a basic, commonsense,
innocent, [naïve](https://angst.blog/15) version of sensibleness. The thing
that says “just don’t do the harmful thing” or “you’re even overthinking
overthinking”.

In [_Fanged Noumena_](https://worldcat.org/isbn/9780955308789), Nick Land
writes of a time in his life in which he chose, and saw, and descended into,
his own insanity:

> I stole Vauung’s name because it was unused, on the basis of an exact
qabbalistic entitlement.

>

> Yet, at least ‘up’ here, Vauung still confuses itself with me, with ruins
and tatters.

>

> This might change. Names have powers and destinies.

>

> I have decided to let Vauung inherit the entire misfortune of my past (a
perverse generosity at best). Its story might never emerge otherwise. There
are rotten threads which even I can follow backwards for decades, but they
soon cease to be interesting. Better to begin more recently (‘better’ in
Vauung’s sense, and so no different from ‘worse’).

>

> It had pledged itself unreservedly to evil and insanity. Its tool of choice,
at that time, the sacred substance amphetamine, of which much can be said, but
mostly elsewhere.

>

> After perhaps a year of fanatical abuse it was, by any reasonable standard,
profoundly insane.

>

> A few examples may suffice, in no particular order.

>

> On one occasion - indicative even to itself - it was in a car being driven
by the sister of its thing (the ruin). It was night, on a motorway. The
journey took several hours. During the previous night, Christmas Eve, it had
followed its usual course into fanatically prolonged artificial insomnia. It
had spent the time devoted to futile ‘writing’ practices - it still pretended
to be ‘getting somewhere’ and was buoyant with ardent purpose, but that is
another story (an intolerably intricate and pointless one). It was accompanied
to the early hours by a repetitive refrain ‘from next door’ - a mediocre but
plausible rock song whose insistent lyric circled around the words: “Going to
hell.”

>

> It knew these words were for it, and laughed idiotically.

>

> “They must really love the new CD they got for Christmas,” it thought,
equally idiotically.

>

> In the car it listened to the radio for the whole journey. Each song was
different, the genres varied, the quality seemingly above average, the themes
tending to the morbid.

>

> “This is a cool radio station,” it said to its sister.

>

> “The radio isn’t on,” its sister replied, concerned.

>

> Vauung learnt that the ruin’s unconscious contained an entire pop industry.

>

> The ruin learnt that it had arrived, somewhere on the motorway.
([629–30](https://worldcat.org/isbn/9780955308789))

That parenthetical phrase — “indicative even to itself” — bounces around in my
skull, sometimes, when I worry about the anti-safety ‘safety’ crowd. The fact
that you can see your own irrationality without the self-awareness being
enough to save you.

I don’t know how else to express my opposition to the ‘obliged to do bad to do
good’ lifeworld, except, I guess, by way of a gesture towards a reflection
that I share with John Darnielle, about the experience of being fourteen years
old: [things get be pretty bad — really bad — but they’re never gonna _feel_
insurmountably bad if you’re having a lot of
sex](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VGZlgj_Zgdo). There’s a limit to how much
anyone, or anything, or any idea, can hurt you when you’re getting laid on the
reg.

> Friends who don’t have a clue
> Well-meaning teachers
> But down in your arms, in your arms
> I am a wild creature.

I’m past those years; I didn’t really talk about them when I was _in_ them. I
think you are, too, (and didn’t, either). The ghosts only come back into view
when I’m ‘home’, driving too-familiar roads at night, facing a
‘[dramatic](https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/narcissistic-
personality-disorder/symptoms-causes/syc-20366662)’ parent.

Maybe some folks just need a hug [or
something](https://twitter.com/QiaochuYuan/status/1630752299932090368),
y’know?

(And maybe the fact that [you thought](https://angst.blog/31) a scientology
personality test would be a funny _first date_ was itself a sign of good
health, in spite of your results?)

For all his faults, Ryan Holiday seems to understand a little of the thing I’m
pointing towards when [he writes that](https://ryanholiday.net/the-perfect-
spouse-is-the-best-life-hack-no-one-told-you-about/)

> It’s as if we don’t want to admit that we can’t do this alone, or that
success may require dealing with the soft parts of ourselves, the
uncomfortable, sticky parts we’d rather pretend weren’t there. We have trouble
seeing the ramifications of our personal lives on our professional lives and
that the best way to navigate the public world is to master and find
contentment in the private one.

>

> The myth is of the lone creative entrepreneur battling the world without an
ally in sight. A defiant combination of Atlas and Sisyphus and David,
wrestling a Goliath-sized mass of doubters and demons. In reality, I’ve found
that nearly every person I admire—every person I’ve met who strikes me as
being someone who I would like to one day be like—lives a quiet life at home
with a person who they’ve teamed up with…for life. The reason this one person
strikes us as special, I find, is because they’re really two people.