---
author: Galen
date: 2023-01-24 06:13:15 +0000
layout: post
permalink: "26"
title: P/NP/PC/NPC
---


When [I asked](https://angst.blog/24) you to articulate what [you thought
you’d lost](https://angst.blog/23), you [said](https://angst.blog/25), as a
first pass:

> the potential to be a roving band of adventurers, the intimidating and
sexily toughened skin we might have developed if we’d been able to hack coming
to understand what it was we ourselves actually wanted, the motivation that
arises from being surrounded by a group who have been through ‘it’ together.

>

> But I notice that [your suggestion](https://angst.blog/24), that there’s a
trade-off in modern life between the group’s ability to know itself and the
group’s ability to act, is incompatible with this. I seem to be grasping at
the idea that there should be some strengthened ability to act from that very
self-knowledge, although it’s coupled with disruptions short term social
harmony. Do we disagree here or is there something else going on?

At a high level, we don’t disagree; something else is going on. My sense is
that you’re sketching a model of ‘group agency’ which is generated (largely)
from _within_ the post-modern/post-agrarian cultural milieu. I’m trying to
sketch an alternative model of group (and individual) agency which is

  1. totally orthogonal to the (predominantly Western) post-agrarian tradition;
  2. within the bounds of what we know _homo sapiens_ can do, cognitively  & culturally, individually & together; &
  3. robustly functional & healthy [now and in the immediate future](https://worldcat.org/isbn/9780691175898).

This project is tricky to communicate for a few reasons.

First, you and I are both _in_ that (predominantly Western) post-agrarian
tradition. This is water. When we beg the King for our freedom, we speak in
the King’s own language.

Second, while ethnographic evidence mostly sucks, any project that seeks to
ground itself in the ‘concretely possible’ of _homo sapiens_ by necessity
relies on the ethnographic record. We can’t engineer cultural practices from a
first-principles understanding of culture. At best, all we can do is point to
the traces left behind by other humans and call them ‘existence proofs’ for
different kinds of relations.

Third, a central pathology of the dysfunctional & unhealthy—in this domain, at
least—is the belief that ‘robustly functional & healthy’ is a myth. When I say
‘this domain’, I mean _the psychological states that are common to normies in
this somewhat-traumatising-by-default thing-that-also-generated-godlike-
technologies-and-powers which we call modern Western culture_. Hurt people
hurt people, and there’s a lot of hurt people telling each other that hurting
& being hurt is universal.

In spite of the trickiness, today, I’m going to _try_ to communicate my
current view in two parts. In the first part, I’ll give you my best account in
abstract language. In the second part, I’ll recapitulate the view by talking
about soldiers, motorbikes, and a bit more D &D. I do all this because the
thing I’m calling my ‘current view’ is, [to borrow a
phrase](https://www.glass-bead.org/article/a-theory-of-vibe/), “an abstractum
that cannot be separated from its concreta”.

### Abstractum

Okay. Here’s my current best reckon.

If you first specify that a given group is mostly composed of people who:

  1. were raised in modern industrial civilisation;
  2. aspire to any version of ‘status’ or ‘success’ in the lower-middle-, middle-, upper-middle-, or upper-class hierarchies of their society; &
  3. are not _extremely_ psychologically abnormal,

Then there is a predictable trade-off between

  1. that group’s ability to communicate openly & honestly about the reality of their own internal social relations, &
  2. that group’s ability to ‘win’ in meaningful-to-them ways in interactions with the wider ‘outside world’ that exists beyond the bounds of that group.

I think this trade-off is present unless some pretty extreme measures are
taken to cause that given group to _become_ ‘agentic’. Insofar as those
‘extreme measures’ are taken, I think they’re

  1. mostly taken in (relatively isolated) subcultures within modern industrial civilisation;
  2. only enabled by the wider modern industrial civilisation insofar as that wider civilisation benefits from the resulting agency; &
  3. only tolerated by the wider modern industrial civilisation insofar as that wider civilisation is able to fictionalise & mythologise the process of taking the measures (and the ‘kinds of people’ who take them), and is able to criminalise & pathologise the effects.

I also think that—relative to different, less traumatised cultural
contexts—the ‘extreme measures’ we’re talking about (usually) only create a
kind of ‘hollow shell’ of agency: within narrow bounds, such measures are
capable of generating groups which ‘get shit done’ and ‘play to win’ and
‘trust each other’ and ‘coordinate and collaborate’, but they’re not capable
of doing so while keeping the epistemics & ontologics of the participating
humans fully intact.

In other words: I don’t think it’s possible to take a group of ‘normal’ people
from our peer group and ‘make them agentic’ in the way we’ve been describing
without also (a) making them super-extra-newly traumatised, or (b) making them
‘weird’ in novel ways that would destroy their ability to ‘be successful’ all
the spaces that previously regarded them as ‘normal’.

To be clear: my claims are contingent, not universal.

I’m saying that there was a set of cultural practices that was common to fixed
agrarian modes of living. I’m saying that this set of cultural practices was
transformed in post-Enlightenment Europe, and became extreme (and near-
universal) in industrial post-modernity.

I’m saying that, right now, in a toxic _This Is Water_ kind of way, most
people are systematically incurious about The Forces That Got Humanity This
Far. They’re also systematically incurious about the cultural practices and
cognitive affordances that Actually Keep The Lights On today.

I’m saying that I think that the modern institutions that enculturate ‘normal
adults’ are _de facto_ chronically traumatising.

I’m saying that phrases like “Capitalism is destroying the world” and “human
nature was always like this” are thought-stoppers.

I’m saying that it obviously wasn’t always like this. I’m saying it was
otherwise, could be otherwise, is otherwise elsewhere, etc.

I’m saying that robust group & individual agency is _natural_ in most healthy
adult humans, but so uncommon today that it is treated with an admixture of
venomous suspicion and jealous lust.

I’m saying that the most cursory reading of ethnography, or archaeology, or
longue durée history—or even just the history of material technological
development—provides ample evidence of ‘agency’ _as default mode_.

I’m saying that we should both be curious and precise about everyone’s
incuriosity and compulsive vagueness.

In that sense, I don’t think we disagree.

### Concreta

[In](https://angst.blog/10) [our](https://angst.blog/11)
[previous](https://angst.blog/12) [letters](https://angst.blog/13), we’ve
talked about the depictions of the military men of the early SAS, and about
some of the tensions between bureaucracy, small-group agency, and State
violence. Despite my best efforts, I’ve got a few family friends who had
careers in the Australian
[SASR](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special_Air_Service_Regiment). One story
is illustrative.

(A
[cloud](https://www.aph.gov.au/About_Parliament/Parliamentary_Departments/Parliamentary_Library/pubs/BriefingBook47p/BreretonReport)
necessarily hangs over the following anecdote, but I’ll tell it anyway.)

As our Career SASR Operator tells it, he was [overseas] on a multi-day
mission. As part of this mission, his team had to make a river crossing at
night. To make the river crossing safely and quickly, they needed another
Australian soldier—not from their team, but from their side—to solve a few
logistics problems ahead of time. In the planning of the mission, he said he
would, but, once they were out there, our Career SASR Operator discovered that
The Other Soldier hadn’t. The boat wasn’t exactly where it was supposed to be,
at the time that it was supposed to be there. By the time the team unfucked
the situation, they were crossing the river in dawn light. The mission still
went fine, and nobody even saw them cross, but it was an extra kink and a
(probabilistically) dangerous delay.

As our Career SASR Operator tells it, when the team got back to base, he
pulled The Other Soldier aside.

“This was our first time working together,” our Career says he says, “so maybe
you didn’t know how this works, but if you fuck up like that again, I’ll kill
you myself.”

Now, The Other Soldier was technically his superior, and also _on his side_ ,
so every civilian who hears this story asks the same question: “But you
wouldn’t _actually_ have killed him, right?”

To which our Career replies, visibly confused, “Of course I would have.
Without a second thought. And any one of my guys would have.”

I think our Career’s reply is a
[plausibly](https://www.rollingstone.com/culture/culture-features/fort-bragg-
murders-1153405/) [honest](https://soundcloud.com/trueanonpod/jsuc).

When I say that it’s possible to take [extreme
measures](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-zqaehQN9sw) in order to create a
‘hollow shell’ of agency, the worldview that I think is created is _one which
replies like this_. To a first approximation, I think that agency was created
inside the skull of our Career, and all his teammates. On closer inspection, I
think it’s obvious that the agency created is a low-fidelity simulation of a
healthier, less violent, un-traumatised, more natural view.

[I’ve said as much before](https://angst.blog/10):

> Modern states such as America and Australia rely heavily on small teams of
highly-trained, ‘special’ forces to enact the most personal violence. And it’s
a fraught affair. First, as far as I can tell, modern States find themselves
in need of extremely specialised, personalised, high-precision forms of
_personal_ violence. The occasional Achilles, in addition to a cop. First, the
State tries to (re)construct low-fidelity simulacra of Men Like Achilles from
a subset the already-usefully-traumatised-and-reliable mass of ordinary
soldiers. This doesn’t work, or rarely does, and so the system instead resigns
itself to selecting people who _can’t_ or _won’t_ submit to ordinary military
structures and—at a kind of strange “arm’s length” remove—allows the older and
more experienced of these to recruit, train, instruct, and direct the younger
and less experienced ones. Provided these small teams are sufficiently violent
in useful-to-the-State ways, they’re given the resources and freedom to
develop a kind of parallel culture. It barely interfaces with the normal
military, because it barely can. Inside a given team, one sees largely
structureless, formal-hierarchy-disrespecting, positive-sum interactions;
members of these communities believe, fundamentally, that every person and
thing ‘outside’ their group is mere environment or terrain (and so not morally
relevant). Including their ostensible commanders.

For the kind of person I’m calling ‘a genuinely healthy adult human’, the game
is ‘Players vs Environment’, and the set of ‘Players’ includes all other
humans & intelligent agents. We’re all working together, in positive sum ways,
to get wins against a harsh Outside.

For the kind of person who is regarded as ‘normal’ today, the game is “Player
vs Player”. While [a](https://doi.org/10.2307/2297414)
[few](http://worldcat.org/isbn/9781784971595)
[people](https://www.projectlawful.com/)
[talk](https://suspendedreason.com/2022/05/16/precis-for-an-action-oriented-
theory-of-language/) [_around_](https://tis.so/an-aspect-of-manipulation-that-
not-all-communication-has) [this](https://a.co/d/c16nrYa)
[‘reality’](https://a.co/d/eUXVxXg), a common strategy in the (perceived)
competition is pretending that no game is taking place.
([Sound](https://podcast.clearerthinking.org/episode/028)
[familiar](https://slatestarcodex.com/2018/01/24/conflict-vs-mistake/)
[yet](https://sarahconstantin.substack.com/p/benevolence-and-malevolence-
conflict)?)

For our Career SASR Operator—who began as (modern) ‘normal’ and then was re-
moulded, via further trauma, as [a post-modern
simulation](https://worldcat.org/isbn/9780062429650) of ‘genuine healthy adult
human’—everyone outside his Team is ‘mere environment’; everyone inside can be
trusted absolutely. Why kill The Other Soldier in the anecdote? Well, why not?
The Other Soldier is just Harsh Environment. You’ve gotta protect your edge
and play to win. The Other Soldier is, here, little more than a problem to be
(quickly) overcome.

This relation to a ‘harsh environment’ brings me to my second concretum:
[motorbike
licences](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/Appendix:Australian_English_military_slang#M).

If you want to travel, there are a range of strategies for relating to the
material reality of terrain that is [large and
sparse](https://absstats.maps.arcgis.com/apps/MapSeries/index.html?appid=b2fa123c0032456a8d47fbd0203a3dec).
At one extreme, you have a worldview rooted in ‘generally staying put, but
taking as much as possible with you when you move’. You can call this the
‘[coffee machine](https://youtu.be/9URGEm1VFyY?t=84) [in your
caravan](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8AJygD0Wyow)’ strategy. At the other
extreme, you have a worldview in which being ‘[on the
move](https://worldcat.org/isbn/9781447264057)’ is [synonymous with
‘life’](https://youtu.be/5JNw8PP5qgo), and one must travel
[obsessively](https://vitalik.ca/general/2022/06/20/backpack.html),
[_philosophically_](https://overcast.fm/+BmEOXxJCA/27:00)
[light](https://overcast.fm/+BmEMxyNpU/34:30). I think of this as the strategy
of ‘[keeping small bag packed](http://johnroderick.wikidot.com/keeping-a-
small-bag-packed)’.

It’s notable, I think, that the question “Has anybody here got a motorbike
licence?” is synonymous, [in Australian military
slang](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/Appendix:Australian_English_military_slang#M),
with handing out the shit job. Having a motorbike licence is a competence, but
one which will get you tricked into low status work.

It’s notable also, I think, that [motorcycles are tightly entangled with
‘outlaw’ status](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Outlaw_motorcycle_club). To
travel on a motorbike is to travel light, alone even when in a group.

In a recent conversation, I found myself expressing this pattern in the
language of D&D. In Australia, bikes (and perhaps [beat-up old
utes](https://youtu.be/h0hZAsUxqgk)) are in the standard starting equipment
list for most PCs; houses with [Hills
Hoists](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hills_Hoist)and caravans ‘with the lot’
are in the starting equipment list for NPCs. In a denser terrain—even
America—a motorbike is only in the starting equipment for [the Rogue
class](https://youtu.be/gzGpBKTRczg), and [Chaotic Evil
NPCs](http://worldcat.org/isbn/9780394428192).

Why such signals? In part, because ‘travelling light’ means choosing to forgo
‘the right tool for the job’. It means _making do_ with a more abstract
multitool: one’s own capacity to solve problems; one’s ability to [process
novel information](https://angst.blog/14), rather than act as [a cog in a
well-oiled machine](https://angst.blog/13); one’s ability to handle
complexity; the generalised grey matter affordance in one’s skull.

Yet all of this pales in comparison to the level of agentic sensibleness
that’s captured in, say, [a group of five old women surviving for five days,
in the desert, at the height of summer](https://www.agsa.sa.gov.au/whats-
on/tarnanthi/tarnanthi-2015/tarnanthi-across-city-state/kapi-ungkupayi-he-
gave-us-water/). Even in the face of centuries of colonial cultural genocide,
it seems obvious that the worldview of those women was (and is) agentic and
‘in contact with reality’. The ability to think and act, individually and
together, is not _necessarily_ hard or rare.