---
author: stella
date: 2023-01-12 22:47:13 +0000
layout: post
permalink: "23"
title: into the breach
---


Let's talk about Matt Yglesias. Matt Yglesias likes being talked about - I'm
pretty sure it's positive for him to be talked about in public even when
you're saying mean things (not even just professionally, I think emotionally -
he says as much in the latest _Washington
Post_ [profile](https://www.washingtonpost.com/lifestyle/2023/01/11/matt-yglesias-slow-boring-in-bidens-washington/)), so I don't need to
feel too guilty about this. For a writer that I haven't ever actually sought
out or tried to read, he sure does get thrust in the way of my path through
the internet, multiple times a week of late. Everything from TV
recommendations to housing, transport, tech regulation, education, and solving
the US Treasury's debt ceiling, as though these are positions one could and
should influence government on simultaneously. Most frequently, what I get to
see - what, more acurately, I get _shown_, strewn as it is
around the place, is the never-ending criticism of
[those](https://twitter.com/ExileGrimm/status/1612959157212135425)
[positions](https:// https://defector.com/celebrated-public-intellectual-attempts-matt-yglesias-math-falls-down-open-manhole/).

But the debate is defined by what people are saying out loud after all, and
Yglesias describes himself as someone who is good at saying something quickly
and clearly. Not necessarily the correct thing - but _a_ thing. Post often, be
decisive, contribute to _the conversation._ We hate it, we read it, strategic
advisors send each other links to it with the subject line '_FYI thought you might find this interesting_'. Fine.  

Something about this, the trained lack of filter that we're dealing with here,
reminded me of your comment that asking people to be evil made them more
agentic. Typically, being in the public eye means a lot of extremely personal
criticism, much of it lathered with hatred and some with threat. To _like_
being amidst that - and not just amidst but poking one's head out, publicly
named - is to embrace some strong characterisation of oneself. Otherwise, I
think you'd collapse under the power of everyone else's read on you, coming at
you thick and fast in your replies. My take is that 'think like a public
intellectual' is roughly equivalent to 'think like a DnD character', but not
quite in the way you described. I mean, not in the careful analysis of
rucksack contents and thinking about strategic opportunities. I really don't
think that's what Yglesias is doing, for all that _Slow Boring_ wants to sell
itself as if it were. Rather, I think it's the adoption of a radically
different priority set than the ones we normally have when we walk into a room
with friends.  

I also don't think it's an accident that telling people they can be 'evil'
accentuates this change. The normal set of (publicly professed) priorities we
have when we're in person together is basically social harmony, followed in
distant second by personal interest. Rating personal interest higher or even
explictly admiting that it's on the radar is percieved so negatively that most
people only do it jokingly, badly, or in secret. I realise we might all say
things like 'I want to make friends with her' which is strictly speaking
motivated by personal interest, but it's also socially cohesive. I mean
personal desires that contradict with the good of the group; more like, 'I
want to make friends with her, my friend's recent ex'. Those are the ones we
barely allow ourselves to feel.  

I know you're not describing a fracturing of social relations in your
gameplay, but you are describing people thinking more vigourously, or perhaps
more clearly, about what their actual purpose is. _How should I be?_ is
perhaps a more bearable question when you're an elf bard with a chip on your
shoulder about your village getting destroyed when you were a child. Or
something. This is maybe what you're getting at when you [describe
it](https://angst.blog/22) as closing '_that gap between motivation and identity_'. But the point is that many of the things that we
may want to be in our real lives are normally off-limits. Ambition is perhaps
the least socially cohesive desire of all.  

There were a few months, many years ago now, when a group of friends of ours
took up playing _Risk_ semi-frequently. It wasn't planned, and they weren't by
and large serious gamers. I wouldn't say we were very good, strategically. But
the games got longer and longer the more we played, and we got more and more
bogged down in the between-move influencing. We didn't have any rules against
it: you could barter and badger and bribe. You could, it soon eventuated,
promise off-table rewards for on-table activity. The line between play and
life got blurrier. We'd accidentally introduced explicit competition into our
friendships.

There was no devastating end to it. Just a few late nights and a couple too
direct words, and a reference or two in daylight acknowledging the hangover of
tension between us, and we collectively kind of... lost interest in playing
any more. We opted for a more harmonious, if less strategic, way of being
friends. We lost something in doing so.  

Matt Yglesias, on the other hand, went full frontal into the breach. I wonder,
now and again, what the impact is to our discourse, that the people most
likely to be up the front are by definition the ones that have made this
choice.  
  
