---
author: stella
date: 2023-01-03 22:06:03 +0000
layout: post
permalink: "21"
title: you
---


An author of narrative fiction (I'm aware this is a horribly broad brush I'm
drawing with) is faced with the decision of how to manage the reader's
expectations towards the heady pull of the plot. As in, at a first approach,
the reader wants some kind of build and release - but if that's all you get
every time, it'd be kind of boring.  

The advantage, narratively speaking, to playing with ideas of agency, is that
it allows You (the author) to subvert the expectations of the reader without
disappointing them. That is, the plot may still move through its nice arc of
tension, but your character may end up unsatisfied for (perhaps even
inconsistently held) reasons of their own, which leave an interesting
aftertaste in the mouth of the reader. Made explicit, this author-reader
dynamic gets you Calvino's _If on a Winter's Night a Traveller_ , where the
expectations of the reader themselves form the narrative tension. The Reader
(the character in the text) has a choice each time about whether to pursue the
narrative further, and the Reader (you) does too. Calvino is flirting with
you: it's a game and it's silly and you can be in on the joke with him, and so
critically action still follows from motivation (you _want_ to keep reading
each missing book). Something like _Molloy_ is a more hostile version of the
same challenges to conventional narrative. The reader is asked to persist
regardless of the lack of gratification or tension; in some way our motivation
and our behaviour become divorced.  

There's some nice side paths to venture down here - like, how does a Reader
differ from a Listener ( _Molloy_ versus _Waiting for Godot_ , or the _Iliad_
to say, Dante's _Inferno_ )? But what I'm most interested in is when and how
did characters start to see themselves as separate from their own motivations?
Has this spread into our consciousness via narrative (because it makes for
characters more interesting than your average Christie criminal - when wills
are less clear, if you'll pardon the pun) or to narrative via society? I'd
argue it's pretty clearly not an ancient conception of self - the heroes of
the _Iliad_ , for instance, hold their agency tightly, except when it's
tempered by immortal intervention. Achilles is the most tortured, but even he
is clearly acting in accordance with his own desires, at least of that moment.
His fate is manipulated, sure, but from without, rather than within. Perhaps
it's the threat, always present in the _Iliad_ , [to make human beings into
things](https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/simone-weil-the-iliad "to make
human beings into things"), which is hardly moderated by, say, the _thing_
having thought that there were multiple forces within itself, y'know,
subagents and stuff.  

There's obviously more literature out there than I can take in on selfhood and
agency through the ages, but the point is that this stuff matters, right? The
way we think about ourselves really does impact what we attempt and how we go
about it. Maybe not as extreme as [causing all of human progress
](https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.1080/17439760.2020.1832250 "causing
all of progress ")but enough to change the kind of life we lead.  
  
